4.5 release page (#1138)
godotengine/godot-website: collections/_release_4_5/entry-highlights-shader-baker.md

---
type: entry
section: highlights
rank: 3
importance: 2
anchor: shader-baker
title: Shader baker
blockquote: Preheat the oven
text: |

>   Anyone that plays modern games, especially on PC, has had the experience of waiting for shader compilation. Usually, it shows up in two forms: either the game makes you wait when it first launches, or it makes you wait mid game in the middle of the action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Anyone that plays modern games, especially on PC, has had the experience of waiting for shader compilation. Usually, it shows up in two forms: either the game makes you wait when it first launches, or it makes you wait right in the middle of the action.
```
"Mid" is already implied by "in the middle of the action", so I think saying "mid game" is redundant

>   That’s because shaders are small programs for your GPU that draw the current scene. And they need to be compiled in order to be used.

Reviewer: A reasonable question here, IMO, would be "well what about the main game code? At least the engine gets compiled by the developers beforehand, so why not the shaders as well?" As far as I understand, the answer is that the shader has to be compiled *very specifically* for your GPU's architecture, where there is less standardization than in processors. It might be good to see if this can be worked into the description here, although this also isn't the place for a full crash course on shaders 😅

Author: cc. @DarioSamo @clayjohn

  While pipeline compilation is still unavoidable and a requirement, Godot now offers a way to do everything that can be done by the editor ahead of time, reducing such wait times by a lot.

>   Where [Ubershaders](https://godotengine.org/releases/4.4/#ubershaders) were a big step towards optimizing pipeline compilation and eliminating compilation stutters, the _shader baker_ addresses the long startup times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Where [ubershaders](https://godotengine.org/releases/4.4/#ubershaders) were a big step towards optimizing pipeline compilation and eliminating compilation stutters, the _shader baker_ addresses the long startup times.
```
At least based on [this post](https://godotengine.org/article/dev-snapshot-godot-4-5-dev-5/), "ubershader" doesn't appear to be a proper noun

>   When enabled in the export settings, the shader baker will scan resources and scenes for shaders and pre-compile them in the right format used by the driver in the target platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  When enabled in the export settings, the shader baker will scan resources and scenes for shaders and pre-compile them in the right format used by the driver on the target platform.
```

>   When enabled in the export settings, the shader baker will scan resources and scenes for shaders and pre-compile them on the right format used by the driver in the target platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  When enabled in the export settings, the shader baker will scan resources and scenes for shaders and pre-compile them in the right format used by the driver in the target platform.
```

>   When targeting certain platforms (Apple devices and D3D12), we even saw a 20× decrease in load times for our TPS demo. Talk about fast!

Reviewer 2: D3D12 isn't a platform as such so this sounds a bit odd IMO

Author: I reformulated to "When targeting Apple and Windows devices, using Metal and D3D12 respectively, we even saw a 20× decrease in load times for our TPS demo. Talk about fast!"

---
type: entry
section: highlights
rank: 3
importance: 2
anchor: shader-baker
title: Shader baker
blockquote: Preheat the oven
text: |

>   Anyone that play modern games, especially on PC, necessarily had the experience of waiting for shaders compilation. Usually, it shows up in two forms: either the game makes you wait when it first launches, or it makes you wait mid game in the middle of an action.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Anyone that plays modern games, especially on PC, has had the experience of waiting for shader compilation. Usually, it shows up in two forms: either the game makes you wait when it first launches, or it makes you wait mid game in the middle of the action.
```

>   Anyone that play modern games, especially on PC, necessarily had the experience of waiting for shaders compilation. Usually, it shows up in two forms: either the game makes you wait when it first launches, or it makes you wait mid game in the middle of an action.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Anyone that play modern games, especially on PC, necessarily had the experience of waiting for shader compilation. Usually, it shows up in two forms: either the game makes you wait when it first launches, or it makes you wait mid game in the middle of an action.
```

>   That's because shaders are small programs for your GPU on how to draw the current scene. And they need to be compiled in order to be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  That’s because shaders are small programs for your GPU that draw the current scene. And they need to be compiled in order to be used.
```

  While pipeline compilation is still unavoidable and a requirement, Godot now offers a way to do everything that can be done by the editor ahead of time, reducing such wait times by a lot.

>   [Ubershaders](https://godotengine.org/releases/4.4/#ubershaders) were a big step towards optimizing pipeline compilation, but now, this one address longer loading times.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  [Ubershaders](https://godotengine.org/releases/4.4/#ubershaders) were a big step towards optimizing pipeline compilation, but now, the _shader baker_ addresses longer loading times.
```

Author: I updated the sentence to that, using your tip.

```
  Where [Ubershaders](https://godotengine.org/releases/4.4/#ubershaders) were a big step towards optimizing pipeline compilation and eliminating compilation stutters, the _shader baker_ addresses the long startup times.
```
